[Music]
welcome to topcast
episode 54 55 something like that
chapter 17 anyway part three of
unsustainable from our beginning of
infinity series
today's will be short and sweet there
will of course be
a part four in order to get through
unsustainable being such an important
central chapter a kind of crescendo of a
sort
this chapter bringing together so much
of what we've talked about in previous
chapters as i've said before
in the other parts i'm going to dive
straight in today
into the reading where david says in
early prehistory
populations were tiny knowledge was
parochial
and history-making ideas were millennia
apart
in those days a meme spread only when
one person observed another in acting at
nearby
and because of the staticity of cultures
rarely
even then so at that time human behavior
resembled that of other animals
and much of what happened was indeed
explained by biogeography
but development such as abstract
language explanation
wealth above the level of subsistence
and long-range
trade all had the potential to erode
parochialism
and hence give causal power to ideas by
the time history began to be recorded
it had long since become the history of
ideas
far more than anything else though
unfortunately
the ideas were still mainly of the
self-disabling
anti-rational variety as for subsequent
history it would take considerable
dedication to insist
that biogeographical explanations
account for the broad sweep of events
why for instance did the societies in
north america and western europe rather
than
asia and eastern europe win the cold war
analyzing
climate minerals flora fauna and
diseases
can teach us nothing about that the
explanation
is that the soviet system lost because
its ideology wasn't true
and all the biogeography in the world
cannot explain what was false about it
coincidentally one of the things that
was most false about the soviet ideology
was the very idea that there is an
ultimate explanation of history in
mechanical non-human
terms as proposed by marx angles
and diamond quite generally mechanical
reinterpretations of human affairs not
only lack explanatory power
they are morally wrong as well for an
effect
they deny the humanity of the
participants casting them and their
ideas
merely as side effects of the landscape
diamond says that his main reason for
writing
guns germs and steel was that unless
people are convinced that the relative
success of europeans was caused by
biogeography they will forever be
tempted by racist explanations
well not readers of this book i trust
presumably diamond can look at ancient
athens the renaissance the enlightenment
all of them the quintessence of
causation through the power of
abstract ideas and see no way of
attributing those events
to ideas and to people he just takes it
for granted
that the only alternative to one
reductionist
dehumanizing reinterpretation of events
is
another pausing there just my reflection
it seems to be the pervasive
worldview of science-minded
intellectuals
who otherwise have divested themselves
of supernatural explanations for events
to fall quickly down a slippery slope of
complete literal physicalism
or in less fancy language they think
that unless you explain
things purely in terms of physical
forces
and physical stuff out there that then
the only alternative is
a supernatural magical explanation and
as we've tried to emphasize
here and david's theme running
throughout the book very
much is knowledge being an abstract
thing
has absolutely central
causal power and effects within
human civilization within the world as
we find it now
it's gradually becoming more and more a
potent force of nature to some extent
often i say the words it's literally a
force of nature knowledge creation is
literally a force of nature of course
that's quite wrong i don't mean
literally a force of nature in the same
way that
physicists regard forces of nature's
forces of nature to be but what i do
mean is that
increasingly the effects
of knowledge creation will have as
dramatic
effects out there in physical space
as does gravity as does the strong
nuclear force
for example that in order to explain
what we're going to see in the future
and events that are going to happen in
the future we are going to have to
explain
the causes in terms of people's abstract
ideas
the explanations that they create and
the choices that they make
and i don't try to sideline choice
and where choices originate
they originate in the minds of people
and this has come up recently and and
near to simultaneously with the release
of this particular podcast is
what are my remarks in response to sam
harris
now sam harris has a wonderfully tight
neat defense of the illusion of free
will here as he calls it
the argument for pure determinism
in the universe and particularly
determinism as applied to
the brains of people and therefore to
the suggestion that
therefore people are nothing
particularly different
to the rest of physical reality
including other animals
and including any other natural process
that might happen out there like a
hurricane let's say
in all cases the hurricane
what the grizzly bear is doing and what
the human being is doing when they're
engaged in
knowledge creation are similar in a
fundamental way
on this view that similarity comes down
to the fact that they are all
the unfolding the unworking of
physical laws acting upon matter and
energy
and as i like to say this is a true
statement
it's a vacuously true statement it
isn't really an explanation as much as
it is a general purpose description of
anything that happens
anywhere at any time and anything that
always has happened and always will
happen
it's a necessary truth but
it doesn't explain what is going on
and if we want to explain what people
are up to
what they're doing referring to physical
laws or
even to the goings on within the brain
in terms of the firing of neurons
is the wrong level of analysis what we
need to refer to
is the abstract creation of knowledge
that then goes on to have physical
effects in the world
these are the true explanations of why
for example
the enlightenment happened in one place
and not another
had the effects that it did and not some
other effects
it's the reason why as david will go on
to say
we can say there is a stark difference
between
an open-ended stream of knowledge
creation that occurs in dynamic
societies
and the explanation as to why it is that
other societies
endured stasis and finally went extinct
people's choices choices to create
knowledge or not
really are the explanation as to why
certain civilizations exist certain
technologies exist
and certain ways in which people either
are able to come together
and collaborate and work towards a
better future
or not happens to be this is all to do
with ideas
not the motion of particles in the void
under deterministic physical laws
those deterministic physical laws acting
on matter
moving through a void is just always
necessarily the case
as a description of what is happening
anywhere cosmologically
in the universe but let's go back to
what david says about this
quote he writes in reality the
difference between sparta and athens or
between savanna rolla
and lorenzo di medici had nothing to do
with their genes
nor did the difference between the
easter islanders and the imperial
british
they were all people universal
explainers and constructors
but their ideas were different nor did
landscape
cause the enlightenment it would be much
truer to say that the landscape we live
in
is the product of ideas the primeval
landscape though packed with evidence
and therefore opportunity contained not
a single idea
it is knowledge alone that converts
landscapes
into resources and humans alone who are
the authors of explanatory knowledge
and hints of the uniquely human behavior
called history
physical resources such as plants
animals and minerals
afford opportunities which may inspire
new ideas but they can neither create
ideas nor cause people to have
particular ideas
they also cause problems but they do not
prevent people from finding ways to
solve those problems
some overwhelming natural event like a
volcanic eruption
might have wiped out an ancient
civilization regardless of what the
victims were thinking
but that sort of thing is exceptional
usually
if there are human beings left alive to
think there are ways of thinking
that can improve their situation and
then improve it further
unfortunately as i have explained there
are also ways of thinking that can
prevent
all improvement thus since the beginning
of civilization
and before both the principal
opportunities for progress
and the principal obstacles to progress
have consisted of
ideas alone these are the determinants
of the broad sweep of history
the primeval distribution of horses or
llamas or flint or uranium
can only affect the details and then
only after
some human being has had an idea for how
to use those things
the effects of ideas and decisions
almost entirely determine which
biographical features
have a bearing on the next chapter of
human history and what the effect will
be
marks engels and diamond have it the
wrong way around
pause there just my reflection on this
notice also that dismissing the
centrality
of human creativity of the human being
as being a causal agent in the unfolding
of historical events
and of the landscape we find ourselves
in now
to sideline that ignore it dismiss it or
just be completely unaware of it
leads in my view inexorably to a
kind of pessimistic world view
where people are impotent in their
capacity to actually change the course
of history
and to do something good and yet we see
a strong theme running through the
beginning of infinity
is that things are getting better all
the time
it's not inexorable okay i've sometimes
said that erroneously as well it's not
like it necessarily
must get better but it is getting better
and there's explanations for that
because people are improving their ideas
in particular their moral
knowledge they're improving that and so
we are quickly
finding ways to lift everyone out of
poverty we are quickly finding ways of
curing disease we are quickly finding
ways to ensure that the environment we
live in
is less polluted more comfortable where
there's less suffering
so the story of human history is not
merely a story of
one where it is human ideas which have
shaped the course of history
but that those ideas are causing people
to
improve the universe in which they find
themselves at the moment only locally
but eventually cosmically now if you
ignore
all that and if you think that humans
are kind of just
uh waves being washed upon the shore
they're just leaves being blown by the
wind they're just another feature of the
environment
and especially if you think that people
are a dangerous
feature of the environment then you will
end up
having ideas about how to control people
about how to try and mitigate the
dangers of people
and that usually comes through social
control so it's absolutely no
accident that that people like marx and
engels come up with
social theories of history
which lead directly to a political
vision
about how society should be arranged
that
are just engines of human suffering
but this is a pervasive popular opinion
even today
no matter how many times these political
ideologies are refuted
by the simple fact that they've been
tried in history
and they've led to starvation and
suffering
and misery for the places in which
they've actually been tried to the
extent that they've been tried
despite that they continue to survive
just today coincidentally the
philosopher ray scott
percival if you don't know who i'm
talking about here look up ray scott
percival uh he's written for
quillette magazine and medium magazine
uh he's a great exposer of popyrian
ideas but
he observed in an article i read today
that the ideologies bad ideologies
tend to persist because all you need is
even if people are being converted out
of those bad ideas all the time
you know it seems to be kind of a
one-way street in a sense that people
come out of
socialism or out of marxism and into
capitalism
but those ideologies don't die because
the rate at which people are converted
out
and persuaded of better ideas about
ideas about freedom and optimism and how
people don't need to be socially
controlled in the way that marx kind of
thinks
nonetheless young people tend to be born
into
thinking these are good ideas they're
raised on mother's knee quite often
they're raised by a school system
they're raised by an education system
in order to endorse these terrible ideas
and so the the the traditions within
education
are very much about inculcating
indoctrinating
people with these bad ideas and it takes
time to be persuaded out of them
if you've been indoctrinated into them
no one is naturally
born into being a marxist of course but
there are religious ideas that are
similar
there are political ideologies that
drive certain educational theories
and so the work is kind of infinite the
work of
freeing liberating people from these
tyrannical notions that take over their
mind
about how we people are evil
and insofar as we're not evil we're
impotent
to do anything to improve the world when
we do improve the world if we improve
the world a lot of people think we don't
improve the world we're just
here immiserating other species on the
planet and hurting
the planet insofar as we can actually
hurt the planet
the work of trying to eradicate these
bad ideas
seems to be unending and probably
possibly will be unending that's me
being a little bit pessimistic but
because the error becomes deeply
entrenched
so early on in the lives of people and
because
governments have a vested interest in
ensuring that
these kind of ideas that the the
government needs to be
uh front and center and important in
people's lives
there's a lot of forces arrayed against
anyone who thinks that
the individual the individual person the
individual knowledge creator can make a
true difference in the world and that
people generally speaking can make a
positive difference in the world and in
fact are the only thing the only entity
actually doing the work of trying to
improve the world
literally the planet literally the lives
of other people it is just other people
doing that
and and the exception is the people that
are causing harm to one another they're
the exception to the rule
far more harm is done by the environment
to people
that that's worse if if nature
was a person they would be the worst
serial killer that would be the worst
torturer the worst
sadist that has ever lived because
nature is
constantly as i've said before
flooding or starving or blasting or
burning etc etc etc the
innocent people that exist on this
planet
the universe is hostile it's not out to
get us but at the same time it's not
providing a very nice environment
for us to live in instead we have to eke
out an existence on
uh in a hostile universe okay
back to the book after that cheery note
um
david writes quote a thousand years is a
long time for a static society to
survive
we think of the great centralized
empires of antiquity which lasted even
longer
but that is a selection effect we have
no record of most static societies
and they must have been much shorter
lived a natural guess
is that most were destroyed by the first
challenge that would have required the
creation
of a significantly new pattern of
behaviour
the isolated location of easter island
and the relatively
hospitable nature of its environment
might have given its static society a
longer lifespan
than it would have if it had been
exposed to more tests by nature and by
other societies
but even those factors are still human
not biogeographical
if the islanders had known how to make
long-range ocean voyages
the island would not have been isolated
in the relevant sense
likewise how hospitable easter island is
depends on what the inhabitants know if
its settlers had known as little about
survival techniques as i do
then they would not have survived their
first week on the island and on the
other hand today
thousands of people live on easter
island without starving and without a
forest though now they are planting one
because they want to
and know how pause they're just my
reflection david kind of hints
at this elsewhere and he mentions oxford
in
the uk as well but you can say it about
anywhere
on the face of the planet everywhere is
inhospitable
almost everywhere is entirely unsuited
to human beings
we are this special kind of species that
well we don't have much we have some
inborn knowledge but our inborn
survival capacity is pretty limited
i mean we're born as helpless babies
unlike you know
the the giraffe or the horse which is
walking within a few hours and able to
look after itself
more or less within a few hours we are
completely helpless for
the first few years of our lives and
then we have to create knowledge in
order to survive
and there's nowhere on earth that is
really a wonderful nursery for
human beings in its natural state only
our
houses and our towns and our cities are
able to really do the job of properly
nurturing
young children and bringing human beings
to the point of
being able to survive themselves within
those cities
and towns and houses but
plonk the average person like me
anywhere in the natural environment here
on earth and i'd be
dead within weeks maybe days
um even if it's a place which is
yeah where we supposedly evolved
sub-saharan africa is not going to be
somewhere
where i'm going to survive the great
rift valley is not going to be somewhere
where i'm going to be able to find
food and clean drinking water so so this
concept of
hospitability of how hospitable a
a place is like easter island depends as
david says
precisely on what the inhabitants know
so how hospitable the environment i find
myself in
here in new south wales at the moment
also
is not merely about my personal
knowledge to a large extent it's about
the knowledge that other people have
thank goodness because it's only by
virtue of the fact that someone else has
been able to build this house
that i don't have knowledge of how to
build this house i don't have knowledge
of how to
generate electricity i have some
understanding of the physics of
electricity generation but if you put me
at a power station where it's actually
going on i wouldn't have a clue
i wouldn't have a clue about uh how much
coal needs to go into the burner
at what rate of these sort of technical
details
but thankfully someone does and overall
the
the civilization is hospitable because
the knowledge instantiated not only in
people's minds but in the
physical artifacts the technology is
there
to make this place hospitable it's not
the natural environment that makes it
hospitable
because the natural environment is not
hospitable it's very unfriendly
like of course now and again there are
times where me personally i i love going
for a walk in nature into inhospitable
nature to get away from
civilization to some extent um because i
just like to have some
extra fresh air or to feel a different
temperature on my skin or to
see the wild animals that are out there
all the nice green trees or perhaps the
nice beach and so on and so forth but
that's the exception to the rule i often
can't wait to get back home again to
where it is
warm and dry and there's food aplenty
so the hospitability is very much
overall depends upon the knowledge that
exists in those places not
merely my personal knowledge although
that's important i have to know how to
switch the lights on and off for example
and get the food from the fridge
that's not much that's expected of me
but the knowledge
of fridges is contained within fridges
and thankfully
people who construct fridges and can
repair fridges and so on and so forth
repeat for every other bit of
technology that keeps my house my town
my city my country
hospitable okay let's keep going we'll
go let's read for a little bit more
today it's going to be a short episode
and
i can promise you part four again very
soon david writes quote
the easter island civilization collapsed
because no human situation is free of
new problems
and static societies are inherently
unstable
in the face of new problems
civilizations rose and collapsed on
other south pacific islands too
including pitcairn island that was part
of the broad sweep of history in the
region
and in the big picture the cause was
that they all had problems that they
failed to solve the easter islanders
failed to navigate their way off the
island
just as the romans failed to solve the
problem of how to change governments
peacefully
if there was a forestry disaster in
easter island that was not what brought
its inhabitants down
it was that they were chronically unable
to solve the problem that this raised
if that problem had not dispatched their
civilization
some other problem eventually would have
sustaining their civilization in its
static
statute obsessed state was never an
option
the only options were whether it would
collapse suddenly and painfully
destroying most of what little knowledge
they had or changed
slowly and for the better perhaps they
would have chosen the latter
if only they had known how paused my
reflection just on that now
importantly and and people might um
easily read past that not noticing the
word slowly
david has said there that the only
option is
easter island could have very quickly
suddenly painfully destroying
the knowledge that's the way in which
the society could have collapsed
the only alternative was to
change slowly and for the better now the
slowly is important i guess another way
of saying that is
incrementally okay uh incrementally in
other words making a small change a
small improvement at a time and i i like
to
say that this is this is sort of a it's
a digital way of viewing
civilizations you want to have
incremental improvement
continuous in a sense you want the
increments to just keep accruing all the
time you want
you want it to be a constant kind of
state of improvement
that's what you want but you won't get
that what of course you'll get is you'll
have an incremental change that
sometimes will be for the worse
but luckily it was only incremental if
you're doing the right thing
in a modern western democratic society
you
try out a policy which is a bit of a
change from the previous policy
and it may well go wrong but because
it's an incremental change on what was
there before you can correct it
you can undo it go back to the previous
state and then try something different
again
which hopefully this time will be an
incremental improvement
you always want the increment to be
central there this this slow kind of
improvement so that
when things inevitably go wrong problems
are inevitable
you can then turn around on a dime
hopefully
and go back to the way things were
before and start again
essentially without too much damage this
is
why evolution within the political
sphere evolution within
social change is so much more important
than revolution
and we hear now you know speaking in
2021 i often don't invoke
contemporary matters in politics but
there's something going on called the
great
resets the great reset is where
rich and powerful people are deciding
that we need to
give up private property that we have to
completely
revolutionize the way in which trade is
conducted we have to revolutionize the
way in which we think about political
institutions
they want the great reset they want
revolution and there has always been
people calling for revolution no matter
how good things are
and how good things have become recently
and how much the pace of improvement has
increased recently there are people the
naysayers are still out there
saying how terrible things are and
therefore we need to have a revolution
we need to undermine the very thing that
has given us
such great wealth and health and success
and improving everything from our
physical environment
by removing the pollution
removing illnesses that were previously
killing
us at a far greater rate as well as
improving the individual lives of people
around the world
through increased freedom wealth trade
etc and so forth but these changes
must remain incremental and if we start
to follow the advice of people who want
revolution
then we end up undoing institutions that
contain
as we've talked about throughout this
series
inexplicit knowledge about how to keep a
society stable
under great change it is only the
western civilizations following
enlightenment traditions
that have been able to maintain this
dynamism
this ability to just slowly
improve the situation for everyone
within that society over time and we
don't know all the ways in which it
works we know some of the ways
we can point to different institutions
and say the reason why we've been able
to remain stable over time is because
often
democratic free and fair elections a
court system and a legal system which is
um
uh blind to whoever the person is that
that is accused of a crime
um capitalism and the ability to freely
trade with people
one to another these things okay are
a part of the story but the entire story
is not well known and well understood
we struggle to understand simple systems
like
atoms and matter very very
clever people become particle physicists
and trying to understand
the complexity of matter but matter the
structure of matter is simple
compared to a civilization and how
societies actually maintain their
stability over time
i would say we know more about the
standard model
of particle physics then we know about
the conditions required in order to
maintain a stable civilization over time
civilizations are the most complex
thing that we know about the most
complex thing that we know about the
the most complicated structures that
human beings have ever come up with
are these social civilizations more
complicated than uh
boeing 747 or an elon musk rocket
or a great ocean liner
you could compare civilizations to these
things but then think
orders of magnitude more complicated
more complex
the moving parts are phenomenally
complicated and we don't know
what they all are okay so that's where i
should end it today
coming up is one of my favorite
anecdotes that
david tells in the entire book
well two two two great anecdotes in the
book one about
how uh when he was at school there
there was someone uh one of these people
who was saying the heavens are falling
of course you know there's going to be
great climate change and it's coming
it's coming
just you wait um but of course it was
the great ice age that was coming when
david was at school and then of course
uh the european
story about cathode ray tubes and how
color television
would be coming to an end i've told that
story once before as well but
finally we get to it in the book it's a
short one for today
but until part four bye-bye
[Music]
um
you